
# Updating the journal #

This chapter explains how the journal is updated.
The work flow described here assumes that the journal update happens on a monthly basis.
However, nothing prevents you from doing it differently.

Remember that the journal keeps track of all financial transactions.
Updating the journal happens in two steps: By manually adding transactions (everything without electronic record, i.e. cash transactions) and by using Ledger's in-built conversion method to automatically add CSV data.
New data is then merged into the existing journal.

## Cash transactions ##

The ``journal.txt`` is never manipulated directly.
Instead, it gets updated automatically using a combination of scripts and aliases (see later).
However, cash transactions need to get into the ledger *somehow*.
Cash transactions should be added to the file ``misc.tmp.txt``.
(The filename ends with ``.tmp.txt`` to denote that it shall never be put into version control. See the file ``.gitignore``; obviously the private repo contains it for the sake of the example.)

So, how do you deal with cash expenses in a double accounting system?
You don't want to track every single dime and you don't want to ignore bigger cash expenses neither.
The most convenient way is to assume that every dollar withdrawn is a dollar spent.
In Ledger's double accounting speak, this means moving money from the account "Assets:YourBank:Checking" to "Expenses:Unknown".
Basically, you assume the money is gone.
However, when you know how the money was spent, you just move it from "Expenses:Unknown" to whatever account you want.
Although this not correct technically, the approach simplifies dealing with cash quite a lot.
The cash was either spent on a specific account or it's an unknown expense.

So tracking cash in ``misc.tmp.txt`` may look like this.

~~~{.scheme}
; This file lists all cash transactions that happened *after* the last
; journal update. Once this data has been added to journal, this file
; is emptied. Note how the scheme is always the same: move money from
; Expenses:Unknown to a specific account.

2042/04/10 * Swimming
    Expenses:Sports:Swimming                $10.00
    Expenses:Unknown

2042/04/13 * Cinema
    Expenses:Cinema                         $15.00
    Expenses:Unknown

2042/04/18 * Tails of the City
    Expenses:Books                          $5.00
    Expenses:Unknown
~~~

We'll see later how the data in ``misc.tmp.txt`` is appended to the journal.

## Electronic transactions ##

Spending cash money is just fine but most our transactions are electronic nowadays.
Keeping track of theses transactions is actually quite easy.
Virtually every financial institution (banks, credit unions, payment service provider, etc.) provides you with a CSV file that lists your transactions.
You should probably change your bank if they don't provide this service.

Ledger has the built-in command ``convert`` which automatically converts CSV files into Ledger's transaction format.
The main feature of interest for us is the account recognition based on the transaction's payee.
See ``meta.txt`` and look for "payee" to get a first feeling how that might work.
We'll use this command in combination with a utility script to convert CSV files in a quite efficient way.

For completeness, I would like you to check out [reckon](https://github.com/cantino/reckon) and/or [csv2ledger](https://github.com/jwiegley/CSV2Ledger).
Both are yet other approaches to convert CSV data.
They did not suit my needs (see below) and it's obviously more fun to hack something together for your own work flow.

### The general work flow for electronic transactions ###

The work flow goes like this:

* Download the CSV file from the bank.
* Call the utility script to convert the input data.
* Check for "unknown" (= not yet recognized) transactions; modify ``meta.txt`` to match these bank transactions with your Ledger accounts.
* Repeat until done.

Let's go through these steps in greater detail.
Getting the CSV data depends obviously on the financial institution.
It's handy to always save it to the same location in a "machine readable name" (ex: ``CSV/bankname_<month><year>.csv`` or ``CSV/bankname_latest.csv``) because this allows for easier scripting.

The utility script (``ecosystem/convert.py``) manipulates the CSV data to make Ledger's ``convert`` understand it.
This is mainly replacing the header lines and providing some more info for Ledger like the bank account's currency.
Ledger's ``convert`` command expects the first line in the CSV file to describe the transaction columns of the remaining lines.
One has to tell Ledger which columns represent the payee, the amount, the date and so on.
For a CSV line like so ...

    04/08/2042,05/08/2042,xx,xx-xx-xx,123456789,JOHN DOE,MONEY FOR LAST NIGHT,200.0

... the new header line may look like this:

    ,date,,,,payee,note,amount

That is, the second column codes for the date, the sixth for the payee and so on.

The converter script needs this predefined header and other information for all your bank accounts (read: all your different CSV files).
They are configured in ``private/bankaccounts.yml``.
This file is read in by the utility script. One example entry of that file may be:

~~~{.yaml}
    Assets___BankName___CurrentAccount:
        convert_header: ',date,,payee,note,,,amount'
        ignored_header_lines: 7
        date_format: '%d.%m.%Y'
        currency: 'EUR'
        ledger_args: '--invert'
        expenses_unknown: 'Expenses:Unknown'
        ignored_transactions:
            - ['.*EXAMPLEPAYEENAME.*', '.*PayPal.*']
        modify_transactions:
            - ['Name Surname";"Unique Desc', 'Name Surname UniqueIdentifier";"Unique Desc']
~~~

The name of the root node equals the bank account's account name in Ledger where colons are replaced by 3 underscores.
In the above case, that would mean the configured account is ``Assets:BankName:CurrentAccount``.
The sub-sections are:

* ``convert_header``: The header line mentioned above.
* ``ignored_header_lines``: The number of header lines in the original CSV file (which should be ignored).
* ``date_format``: The date format of the transaction entries (more [here](http://www.ledger-cli.org/3.0/doc/ledger3.html#Date-and-Time-Format-Codes)).
* ``currency``: The currency used in this account.
* ``ledger_args``: Further ledger arguments (``--invert`` inverts the input amounts).
* ``expenses_unknown`` (optional): Ledger assigns money from unknown sources to the in-built account "Expenses:Unknown". You may change that account if needed.
* ``ignored_transactions`` (optional): A list of regular expressions for transactions to be ignored. For example, I always use this when moving money from one bank account to another. In this case, both CSV files contain the transaction. One shall be ignored.
* ``modify_transactions`` (optional): A 2D list containing [old_regexp, replacement] to modify transactions if needed. This operates on the original input data without modifying it. For example, you may want to replace semicolons by commas: ``[';', ',']``. The order of modifications is obviously important.

The utility script also removes non-ASCII characters from the input file.

You may wonder how Ledger's ``convert`` command actually matches transactions to Leger accounts?
When defining accounts in Ledger, one may also provide a regular expression to identify an account by it's payee.
For example:

~~~{.diff}
account Expenses:Food:Groceries
 payee ^MegaSuperMarket
~~~

This not only defines the "Expense:Food:Groceries" account but also states that any transaction with the payee "MegaSupermarket" is associated with that account.
This is where the ``modify_transactions`` variable from the ``bankaccounts.yml`` comes in handy: For example, when the same payee occurs in multiple transactions for different reasons you may want to modify a transaction to associate it with the correct account.
You could for example modify the payee to include the transaction's note or description and then match the correct Ledger account by that combination (see the example above).
Checkout ``private/bankaccounts.yml`` for some more ideas.

When starting to fill your journal, you will likely need to modify your account matching quite often and then just rerun the converter script.
Later on, this is rarely needed.

After converting the CSV file to Ledger's format, it is saved in a temporary file in ``./tmp/``.
It might happen that you want to modify it then for whatever reasons.

## Putting it all together with an example ##

We now have all the pieces to update the journal in a consistent and efficient way.
The overall procedure is:

* Update ``misc.tmp.txt`` whenever you think of it or when you empty you wallet.
* For each electronic account (bank account/credit card/payment service/etc.):
    - Download the CSV file from the service provider
    - Convert the CSV file into a Ledger-formated file.
* Merge manually added & automatically generated data. (will be shown in the example below)
* Append it to the actual ``journal.txt``. (will be shown in the example below)

There are aliases for most of the above steps.
Check out the journal update section in ``ecosystem/alias`` and ``private/alias.local`` for details.
Let's go over one example using the private repo.

### Update ``misc.tmp.txt`` ###

~~~{.bash}
$ mux start GSWL-private # if not done yet
# jump to the window 'edit' and open misc.tmp.txt
~~~

You will see that some transaction have already been added to that file.
Feel free to add more postings.
Just make sure you stay within the "current" month for the sake of the example (we're in May 2042 by the way ...).

### Get data from NorthBank  ### {#Get_data_from_Northbank}

In the sample repo, two banks a used as placeholders: NorthBank & SouthBank.
Imagine you would now go to your NorthBank online banking site and download the CSV data for the last month (the sample repo already contains this file):

~~~{.bash}
$ mux start GSWL-private # if not done yet
# not really using wget obviously!
$ wget https://banking.northbank.com/myaccount/latest.csv CSV/apr2042_northbank.csv
~~~

Note how I renamed the CSV file to a machine readable name (i.e. added the date in a consistent manner).
This now enables us to parse the ledger file with a simple alias:

~~~{.bash}
$ mux start GSWL-private # if not done yet
# jump to the window 'make'
$ lmnorthbank # lm =~ last month, see private/alias.local
~~~

You should see the data from ``CSV/apr2042_northbank.csv`` converted into Ledger's format.
The data is stored in ``./tmp/northbank.tmp.txt`` and shown with ``less``; press ``j/k/q`` to move up/move down/quit.
Some things of interest here:

* Sometimes, one needs to fix account matching or other stuff, so you may call ``lmnorthbank`` multiple times.
* In case you modified the output file by hand, a backup is stored in ``./tmp/<bank>.tmp.txt.bak`` to not overwrite your changes when running ``lmnorthbank`` again.
* See how Ledger automatically assigned the correct accounts. This is due to the ``payee`` directives in ``GSWL-private/meta.txt``. In this example, you may want to try to match the book shop expenses correctly, too.
* One transaction has been ignored because money was moved to the SouthBank's account and also figures in that CSV file (see ``bankaccounts.yml`` for details).

Furthermore, you will have noticed that some transactions include more than 2 postings, namely the electricity & rent payments.
This is due to Ledger's feature called "Automated Transaction".
The [Advanced chapter](#Automated_Transactions) explains this in greater detail.
For now, we'll keep the explanation short:
The file ``private/csv2journal.txt`` is taken into account when converting CSV files.
It contains automated transactions that should be applied to the actual transactions from the CSV file.
This results in more than two Ledger account involved into a single bank transaction.
When and how this can be used completely dependents on you.
Again, the rent & electricity example is explained further below and we can safely skip this for now.

### Get data from SouthBank  ###

This is much like NorthBank:

~~~{.bash}
$ mux start GSWL-private # if not done yet
# jump to the window 'make'
$ wget https://banking.southbank.com/account/data.csv CSV/apr2042_southbank.csv
$ lmsoutbhank
~~~

### Merging everything ###

At this point, we can merge the different sources (``misc.tmp.txt`` & bank account files in ``private/tmp/*.txt``) and append them to ``journal.txt``.
The folder should now look like this:

~~~{.bash}
$ ls CSV # check whether we have "downloaded" the CSV files
apr2042_northbank.csv  apr2042_southbank.csv
$ ls tmp # check whether we converted the CSV files
apr2042_northbank.csv.tmp  apr2042_northbank.csv.tmp.bak
apr2042_southbank.csv.tmp  apr2042_southbank.csv.tmp.bak
~~~

Merging is achieved by the ``lmmake`` command (see ``ecosystem/alias``).
What this basically does is:

* Concatenate the different sources into one ledger file.
* Sort the merged file's transactions by date.
* Checkout a clean version of ``journal.txt``
* Append the new transactions to ``journal.txt``
* Output the new transactions with ``less``.

Let's go:

~~~{.bash}
$ mux start GSWL-private # if not done yet
# jump to the window 'make'
$ lmmake
2042/04/08 * Mr. Scrooge
    ; CSV data:
    ; from : 08/04/2042,xxx,xx-xx-xx,xxxxxxxx,Mr. Scrooge,520.00,,
    ; (raw): 08/04/2042,xxx,xx-xx-xx,xxxxxxxx,Mr. Scrooge,520.00,,
    Expenses:Rent                            $520.00
    Assets:NorthBank:Checking               $-520.00
    Expenses:Rent                           $-260.00
    Receivables:Flatmates                    $260.00


2042/04/10 * Swimming
    Expenses:Sports:Swimming                  $10.00
    Expenses:Unknown

2042/04/13 * Cinema
    Expenses:Cinema                           $15.00
    Expenses:Unknown
...

$ git status
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)

        modified:   journal.txt

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
$ git add journal.txt
$ git commit -m "Updated journal for April 2042"
~~~

That's it!
Use ``lmclean`` to wipe out everything in ``./tmp`` though you don't really need to do this.
For the next update, remember to clean up ``mist.tmp.txt``.

A journal update is the right moment to fully appreciate the ``ledreports`` command because some of the reports defined in ``private/reports.txt`` refer to the "last month" (april 2042 in our example case).
See [above](#Recurring_Reports).

\newpage
