
# The Setup #

Throughout this book, we will use a specific setup for Ledger.
Two repositories are used to split up code and data.
The "ecosystem" folder (see [GSWL-ecosystem](https://github.com/rolfschr/GSWL-ecosystem)) contains the scripts & other stuff to manipulate the journal.
On the other hand, the "private" folder will contain the actual financial data.
I have provided a sample private folder (see [GSWL-private](https://github.com/rolfschr/GSWL-private)) which we'll use as a reference.

Splitting up code & data allows to only encrypt what is necessary, share common code more easily and enable independent version control.

The Readme at [GSWL-private](https://github.com/rolfschr/GSWL-private) explains how to clone the repos.
Go ahead and get them now.

Let's look at the repo contents:

~~~{.bash}
$ cd ~/src

$ ls ~/src/GSWL-ecosystem
alias  convert.py reports.py
# Omitting other files for now ...

$ ls ~/src/GSWL-private
alias.local       csv2journal.txt  main.txt  misc.tmp.txt
bankaccounts.yml  journal.txt      meta.txt  reports.txt
# Omitting other files for now ...
~~~

## Common files ##

The ecosystem contains code to handle the actual data in a smart (automatic!) way.
The scripts ``convert.py`` and ``report.py`` help to integrate external CSV data or interpret the data respectively.
The ``alias`` file is a BASH script which defines common aliases and functions.
You can check out these files now but we'll cover them later after having had look at the private repo.

## Private data ##

There a lot of files in the private repo.
Only the most important ones are covered for now.

Remember that Ledger expects the journal file to be provided by ``-f``.
The aliases defined in the ecosystem assume this file to be named ``main.txt``.
However, this file does not contain any transactional data.
The file only contains a list of ``include`` statements.
It may look like this:

~~~{.commonlisp}
; This is the main entry file for ledger.
; Nothing fancy happens here. All real data is in journal.txt, configuration
; stuff etc. is to be found in meta.txt.

; Include the config file.
include meta.txt

; Include the actual journal.
include journal.txt
~~~

Using ``include`` statements is a good way to keep stuff separated which does not belong together.
It also helps you to try out new Ledger configurations or data without polluting your version-controlled files.

The actual transactions are all stored in ``journal.txt``.
Checkout the private folder's ``journal.txt`` to get a first overview of the sample data.


### Going meta ###

In this setup, the file ``meta.txt`` should contain all Ledger configuration stuff & any other non-transactional data.

For example, a useful statement inside this file is ``account``.
This lets you predefine any accounts that shall be used by Ledger.
Ledger does not require you to do so but it is good practice anyway.
Furthermore we will use the ``--pedantic`` command line argument later on which causes Ledger to produce an error when unknown accounts are used.
Account definitions may look like this:

~~~{.commonlisp}
account Assets:Checking
account Expenses:Dining
account Expenses:Groceries
account Income:Salary
~~~

Likewise, ``commodity`` defines the valid commodities in use:

~~~{.commonlisp}
commodity $
commodity €
commodity BTC
~~~

The sample ``meta.txt`` does indeed not include other configuration.
Or does it?

### Other files ###

Then, there is a Bash script called ``alias.local`` which contains local configurations.
This script is automatically sourced by ``ledger-ecoystem/alias``.
Now may be a good moment to have a look at these scripts.
Try to find out what the `led` command looks like, what the content of the environment variable ``$LAST_AMN`` is and how ``alias.local`` is sourced.
The file eco.conf is used to for configuration of the ecosystem. Most users will not require changes to this file.
Finally, the files ``bankaccounts.yml``, ``csv2journal.txt`` & ``misc.tmp.txt`` are used to update the journal in an automated fashion.
``reports.txt`` lists questions repeatedly asked about the financial situation.
All of this is explained in later chapters but feel free to inspect them right away.

## Orchestrating ecosystem & private data ##

You should have the following mental model of the presented setup:
Most code is in the ecosystem folder.
All actual data is in the private folder.
Working with Ledger means working in the private folder.
To unleash the power of all scripts etc., one needs to source ``ecosystem/alias`` form within the private folder.
This in turn sources ``alias.local`` from the current working directory.
The local alias file allows to overwrite ecosystem functionality or add new features.

Having the ecosystem scripts & the sample data available allows to get a more precise feeling of the day to day work with Ledger.
Run the following commands:

~~~{.bash}
$ cd ~/src/GSWL-private && source ~/src/GSWL-ecosystem/alias # See GSWL-private/.bashrc for an alias!
$ which led
$ led bal
$ led reg
$ ledreports # explained later
~~~

To be absolutely clear: ``led`` is just an alias to ``ledger`` combined with some predefined arguments (see ``ecosystem/alias``).
You can of course run plain ``ledger`` on the same data.
In this case, you'll need to tell Ledger at least where to find the journal file: ``ledger -f main.txt``.
Think of ``led`` as ``ledger`` with a predefined input file and sane defaults.

## Tmux & Tmuxinator ##

I highly recommend the use of [Tmux](http://tmux.sourceforge.net/) for whatever business you're doing on the command line.
This tool speeds up your work flow so much it is actually ridiculous.
It as a better version of ``screen`` and "lets you switch easily between several programs in one terminal, detach them (they keep running in the background) and reattach them to a different terminal".
If you do not use it till now, you will wonder how you survived before.
The sample ``.tmux.conf`` in the private repository and this [HowTo](https://gist.github.com/MohamedAlaa/2961058) gets you started if you need it.
Have a look at the sample ``.tmux.conf`` and make sure to know at least how to jump between windows, jump between panes, create a new window and maximize (resize) a pane.

[Tmuxinator](https://github.com/tmuxinator/tmuxinator) sits on top of tmux and lets you predefine tmux sessions for specific tasks.
I defined a specific tmux session for usage with the private folder.
The tmuxinator session file ``.tmuxinator.ledger.yml`` can be found in the private repository (check it out now!).

Starting a tmux session with the private repo (assuming tmux & tmuxinator are installed):

~~~{.bash}
$ cp ~/src/GSWL-private/.tmux.conf ~/ # Optional, only if you've never used tmux
$ mkdir -p ~/.tmuxinator
$ ln -s ~/src/GSWL-private/.tmuxinator.GSWL-private.yml ~/.tmuxinator/GSWL-private.yml
$ mux start GSWL-private # Starts a new Tmux session
~~~

Within each Tmux session window, ``ecosystem/alias`` is sourced.

The sample ``GSLW-private/.bashrc`` provides some aliases to start/stop the Tmux sessions.
You should source this file in your ``~/.bashrc`` anyways.

With the setup up and running, we can now further play around with Ledger's actual features.

## Your own setup ##

To get started with your personal setup, checkout (no pun intended) [this](https://github.com/rolfschr/GSWL-private-empty).

\newpage
